many years ago , there was an emperor , who was so excessively fond of new clothes , that he spent all his money in dress .
he did not trouble himself in the least about his soldiers ; nor did he care to go either to the theatre or the chase , except for the opportunities then afforded him for displaying his new clothes .
he had a different suit for each hour of the day ; and as of any other king or emperor , one is accustomed to say , " he is sitting in council , " it was always said of him , " the emperor is sitting in his wardrobe . "
time passed merrily in the large town which was his capital ; strangers arrived every day at the court .
one day , two rogues , calling themselves weavers , made their appearance .
they gave out that they knew how to weave stuffs of the most beautiful colors and elaborate patterns , the clothes manufactured from which should have the wonderful property of remaining invisible to everyone who was unfit for the office he held , or who was extraordinarily simple in character .
" these must , indeed , be splendid clothes ! " thought the emperor .
" had i such a suit , i might at once find out what men in my realms are unfit for their office , and also be able to distinguish the wise from the foolish !
this stuff must be woven for me immediately . "
and he caused large sums of money to be given to both the weavers in order that they might begin their work directly .
so the two pretended weavers set up two looms , and affected to work very busily , though in reality they did nothing at all .
they asked for the most delicate silk and the purest gold thread ; put both into their own knapsacks ; and then continued their pretended work at the empty looms until late at night .
" i should like to know how the weavers are getting on with my cloth , " said the emperor to himself , after some little time had elapsed ; he was , however , rather embarrassed , when he remembered that a simpleton , or one unfit for his office , would be unable to see the manufacture .
to be sure , he thought he had nothing to risk in his own person ; but yet , he would prefer sending somebody else , to bring him intelligence about the weavers , and their work , before he troubled himself in the affair .
all the people throughout the city had heard of the wonderful property the cloth was to possess ; and all were anxious to learn how wise , or how ignorant , their neighbors might prove to be .
" i will send my faithful old minister to the weavers , " said the emperor at last , after some deliberation , " he will be best able to see how the cloth looks ; for he is a man of sense , and no one can be more suitable for his office than he is . "
so the faithful old minister went into the hall , where the knaves were working with all their might , at their empty looms .
" what can be the meaning of this ? " thought the old man , opening his eyes very wide .
" i cannot discover the least bit of thread on the looms . "
however , he did not express his thoughts aloud .
the impostors requested him very courteously to be so good as to come nearer their looms ; and then asked him whether the design pleased him , and whether the colors were not very beautiful ; at the same time pointing to the empty frames .
the poor old minister looked and looked , he could not discover anything on the looms , for a very good reason , viz : there was nothing there .
" what ! " thought he again .
" is it possible that i am a simpleton ?
i have never thought so myself ; and no one must know it now if i am so .
can it be , that i am unfit for my office ?
no , that must not be said either .
i will never confess that i could not see the stuff . "
" well , sir minister ! " said one of the knaves , still pretending to work .
" you do not say whether the stuff pleases you . "
" oh , it is excellent ! " replied the old minister , looking at the loom through his spectacles .
" this pattern , and the colors , yes , i will tell the emperor without delay , how very beautiful i think them . "
" we shall be much obliged to you , " said the impostors , and then they named the different colors and described the pattern of the pretended stuff .
the old minister listened attentively to their words , in order that he might repeat them to the emperor ; and then the knaves asked for more silk and gold , saying that it was necessary to complete what they had begun .
however , they put all that was given them into their knapsacks ; and continued to work with as much apparent diligence as before at their empty looms .
the emperor now sent another officer of his court to see how the men were getting on , and to ascertain whether the cloth would soon be ready .
it was just the same with this gentleman as with the minister ; he surveyed the looms on all sides , but could see nothing at all but the empty frames .
" does not the stuff appear as beautiful to you , as it did to my lord the minister ? " asked the impostors of the emperor's second ambassador ; at the same time making the same gestures as before , and talking of the design and colors which were not there .
" i certainly am not stupid ! " thought the messenger .
" it must be , that i am not fit for my good , profitable office !
that is very odd ; however , no one shall know anything about it . "
and accordingly he praised the stuff he could not see , and declared that he was delighted with both colors and patterns .
" indeed , please your imperial majesty , " said he to his sovereign when he returned , " the cloth which the weavers are preparing is extraordinarily magnificent . "
the whole city was talking of the splendid cloth which the emperor had ordered to be woven at his own expense .
and now the emperor himself wished to see the costly manufacture , while it was still in the loom .
accompanied by a select number of officers of the court , among whom were the two honest men who had already admired the cloth , he went to the crafty impostors , who , as soon as they were aware of the emperor's approach , went on working more diligently than ever ; although they still did not pass a single thread through the looms .
" is not the work absolutely magnificent ? " said the two officers of the crown , already mentioned .
" if your majesty will only be pleased to look at it !
what a splendid design !
what glorious colors ! " and at the same time they pointed to the empty frames ; for they imagined that everyone else could see this exquisite piece of workmanship .
" how is this ? " said the emperor to himself .
" i can see nothing !
this is indeed a terrible affair !
am i a simpleton , or am i unfit to be an emperor ?
that would be the worst thing that could happen--oh ! the cloth is charming , " said he , aloud .
" it has my complete approbation . "
and he smiled most graciously , and looked closely at the empty looms ; for on no account would he say that he could not see what two of the officers of his court had praised so much .
all his retinue now strained their eyes , hoping to discover something on the looms , but they could see no more than the others ; nevertheless , they all exclaimed , " oh , how beautiful ! " and advised his majesty to have some new clothes made from this splendid material , for the approaching procession .
" magnificent !
charming !
excellent ! " resounded on all sides ; and everyone was uncommonly gay .
the emperor shared in the general satisfaction ; and presented the impostors with the riband of an order of knighthood , to be worn in their button-holes , and the title of " gentlemen weavers . "
the rogues sat up the whole of the night before the day on which the procession was to take place , and had sixteen lights burning , so that everyone might see how anxious they were to finish the emperor's new suit .
they pretended to roll the cloth off the looms ; cut the air with their scissors ; and sewed with needles without any thread in them .
" see ! " cried they , at last .
" the emperor's new clothes are ready ! "
and now the emperor , with all the grandees of his court , came to the weavers ; and the rogues raised their arms , as if in the act of holding something up , saying , " here are your majesty's trousers !
here is the scarf !
here is the mantle !
the whole suit is as light as a cobweb ; one might fancy one has nothing at all on , when dressed in it ; that , however , is the great virtue of this delicate cloth . "
" yes indeed ! " said all the courtiers , although not one of them could see anything of this exquisite manufacture .
" if your imperial majesty will be graciously pleased to take off your clothes , we will fit on the new suit , in front of the looking glass . "
the emperor was accordingly undressed , and the rogues pretended to array him in his new suit ; the emperor turning round , from side to side , before the looking glass .
" how splendid his majesty looks in his new clothes , and how well they fit ! " everyone cried out .
" what a design !
what colors !
these are indeed royal robes ! "
" the canopy which is to be borne over your majesty , in the procession , is waiting , " announced the chief master of the ceremonies .
" i am quite ready , " answered the emperor .
" do my new clothes fit well ? " asked he , turning himself round again before the looking glass , in order that he might appear to be examining his handsome suit .
the lords of the bedchamber , who were to carry his majesty's train felt about on the ground , as if they were lifting up the ends of the mantle ; and pretended to be carrying something ; for they would by no means betray anything like simplicity , or unfitness for their office .
so now the emperor walked under his high canopy in the midst of the procession , through the streets of his capital ; and all the people standing by , and those at the windows , cried out , " oh !
how beautiful are our emperor's new clothes !
what a magnificent train there is to the mantle ; and how gracefully the scarf hangs ! " in short , no one would allow that he could not see these much-admired clothes ; because , in doing so , he would have declared himself either a simpleton or unfit for his office .
certainly , none of the emperor's various suits , had ever made so great an impression , as these invisible ones .
" but the emperor has nothing at all on ! " said a little child .
" listen to the voice of innocence ! " exclaimed his father ; and what the child had said was whispered from one to another .
" but he has nothing at all on ! " at last cried out all the people .
the emperor was vexed , for he knew that the people were right ; but he thought the procession must go on now !
and the lords of the bedchamber took greater pains than ever , to appear holding up a train , although , in reality , there was no train to hold .
there was once a poor prince , who had a kingdom .
his kingdom was very small , but still quite large enough to marry upon ; and he wished to marry .
it was certainly rather cool of him to say to the emperor's daughter , " will you have me ? "
but so he did ; for his name was renowned far and wide ; and there were a hundred princesses who would have answered , " yes ! " and " thank you kindly . "
we shall see what this princess said .
listen !
it happened that where the prince's father lay buried , there grew a rose tree--a most beautiful rose tree , which blossomed only once in every five years , and even then bore only one flower , but that was a rose !
it smelt so sweet that all cares and sorrows were forgotten by him who inhaled its fragrance .
and furthermore , the prince had a nightingale , who could sing in such a manner that it seemed as though all sweet melodies dwelt in her little throat .
so the princess was to have the rose , and the nightingale ; and they were accordingly put into large silver caskets , and sent to her .
