a certain king had a beautiful garden , and in the garden stood a tree which bore golden apples .
these apples were always counted , and about the time when they began to grow ripe it was found that every night one of them was gone .
the king became very angry at this , and ordered the gardener to keep watch all night under the tree .
the gardener set his eldest son to watch ; but about twelve o"clock he fell asleep , and in the morning another of the apples was missing .
then the second son was ordered to watch ; and at midnight he too fell asleep , and in the morning another apple was gone .
then the third son offered to keep watch ; but the gardener at first would not let him , for fear some harm should come to him : however , at last he consented , and the young man laid himself under the tree to watch .
as the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling noise in the air , and a bird came flying that was of pure gold ; and as it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak , the gardener"s son jumped up and shot an arrow at it .
but the arrow did the bird no harm ; only it dropped a golden feather from its tail , and then flew away .
the golden feather was brought to the king in the morning , and all the council was called together .
everyone agreed that it was worth more than all the wealth of the kingdom : but the king said , " one feather is of no use to me , i must have the whole bird . "
then the gardener"s eldest son set out and thought to find the golden bird very easily ; and when he had gone but a little way , he came to a wood , and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting ; so he took his bow and made ready to shoot at it .
then the fox said , " do not shoot me , for i will give you good counsel ; i know what your business is , and that you want to find the golden bird .
you will reach a village in the evening ; and when you get there , you will see two inns opposite to each other , one of which is very pleasant and beautiful to look at : go not in there , but rest for the night in the other , though it may appear to you to be very poor and mean . "
but the son thought to himself , " what can such a beast as this know about the matter ? "
so he shot his arrow at the fox ; but he missed it , and it set up its tail above its back and ran into the wood .
then he went his way , and in the evening came to the village where the two inns were ; and in one of these were people singing , and dancing , and feasting ; but the other looked very dirty , and poor .
" i should be very silly , " said he , " if i went to that shabby house , and left this charming place " ; so he went into the smart house , and ate and drank at his ease , and forgot the bird , and his country too .
time passed on ; and as the eldest son did not come back , and no tidings were heard of him , the second son set out , and the same thing happened to him he met the fox , who gave him the good advice : but when he came to the two inns , his eldest brother was standing at the window where the merrymaking was , and called to him to come in ; and he could not withstand the temptation , but went in , and forgot the golden bird and his country in the same manner .
time passed on again , and the youngest son too wished to set out into the wide world to seek for the golden bird ; but his father would not listen to it for a long while , for he was very fond of his son , and was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also , and prevent his coming back .
however , at last it was agreed he should go , for he would not rest at home ; and as he came to the wood , he met the fox , and heard the same good counsel .
but he was thankful to the fox , and did not attempt his life as his brothers had done ; so the fox said , " sit upon my tail , and you will travel faster . "
so he sat down , and the fox began to run , and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair whistled in the wind .
when they came to the village , the son followed the fox"s counsel , and without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all night at his ease .
in the morning came the fox again and met him as he was beginning his journey , and said , " go straight forward , till you come to a castle , before which lie a whole troop of soldiers fast asleep and snoring : take no notice of them , but go into the castle and pass on and on till you come to a room , where the golden bird sits in a wooden cage ; close by it stands a beautiful golden cage ; but do not try to take the bird out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome one , otherwise you will repent it . "
then the fox stretched out his tail again , and the young man sat himself down , and away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled in the wind .
before the castle gate all was as the fox had said : so the son went in and found the chamber where the golden bird hung in a wooden cage , and below stood the golden cage , and the three golden apples that had been lost were lying close by it .
then thought he to himself , " it will be a very droll thing to bring away such a fine bird in this shabby cage " ; so he opened the door and took hold of it and put it into the golden cage .
but the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke , and they took him prisoner and carried him before the king .
the next morning the court sat to judge him ; and when all was heard , it sentenced him to die , unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as swiftly as the wind ; and if he did this , he was to have the golden bird given him for his own .
so he set out once more on his journey , sighing , and in great despair , when on a sudden his friend the fox met him , and said , " you see now what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel .
i will still , however , tell you how to find the golden horse , if you will do as i bid you .
you must go straight on till you come to the castle where the horse stands in his stall : by his side will lie the groom fast asleep and snoring : take away the horse quietly , but be sure to put the old leathern saddle upon him , and not the golden one that is close by it . "
then the son sat down on the fox"s tail , and away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled in the wind .
all went right , and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden saddle .
but when the son looked at the horse , he thought it a great pity to put the leathern saddle upon it .
" i will give him the good one , " said he ; " i am sure he deserves it . "
as he took up the golden saddle the groom awoke and cried out so loud , that all the guards ran in and took him prisoner , and in the morning he was again brought before the court to be judged , and was sentenced to die .
but it was agreed , that , if he could bring thither the beautiful princess , he should live , and have the bird and the horse given him for his own .
then he went his way very sorrowful ; but the old fox came and said , " why did not you listen to me ?
if you had , you would have carried away both the bird and the horse ; yet will i once more give you counsel .
go straight on , and in the evening you will arrive at a castle .
at twelve o"clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house : go up to her and give her a kiss , and she will let you lead her away ; but take care you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother . "
then the fox stretched out his tail , and so away they went over stock and stone till their hair whistled again .
as they came to the castle , all was as the fox had said , and at twelve o"clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the kiss , and she agreed to run away with him , but begged with many tears that he would let her take leave of her father .
at first he refused , but she wept still more and more , and fell at his feet , till at last he consented ; but the moment she came to her father"s house the guards awoke and he was taken prisoner again .
then he was brought before the king , and the king said , " you shall never have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops the view from my window . "
now this hill was so big that the whole world could not take it away : and when he had worked for seven days , and had done very little , the fox came and said .
" lie down and go to sleep ; i will work for you . "
and in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone ; so he went merrily to the king , and told him that now that it was removed he must give him the princess .
then the king was obliged to keep his word , and away went the young man and the princess ; and the fox came and said to him , " we will have all three , the princess , the horse , and the bird . "
" ah ! " said the young man , " that would be a great thing , but how can you contrive it ? "
" if you will only listen , " said the fox , " it can be done .
when you come to the king , and he asks for the beautiful princess , you must say , " here she is ! " then he will be very joyful ; and you will mount the golden horse that they are to give you , and put out your hand to take leave of them ; but shake hands with the princess last .
then lift her quickly on to the horse behind you ; clap your spurs to his side , and gallop away as fast as you can . "
all went right : then the fox said , " when you come to the castle where the bird is , i will stay with the princess at the door , and you will ride in and speak to the king ; and when he sees that it is the right horse , he will bring out the bird ; but you must sit still , and say that you want to look at it , to see whether it is the true golden bird ; and when you get it into your hand , ride away . "
this , too , happened as the fox said ; they carried off the bird , the princess mounted again , and they rode on to a great wood .
then the fox came , and said , " pray kill me , and cut off my head and my feet . "
but the young man refused to do it : so the fox said , " i will at any rate give you good counsel : beware of two things ; ransom no one from the gallows , and sit down by the side of no river . "
then away he went .
" well , " thought the young man , " it is no hard matter to keep that advice . "
he rode on with the princess , till at last he came to the village where he had left his two brothers .
and there he heard a great noise and uproar ; and when he asked what was the matter , the people said , " two men are going to be hanged . "
as he came nearer , he saw that the two men were his brothers , who had turned robbers ; so he said , " cannot they in any way be saved ? "
but the people said " no , " unless he would bestow all his money upon the rascals and buy their liberty .
then he did not stay to think about the matter , but paid what was asked , and his brothers were given up , and went on with him towards their home .
and as they came to the wood where the fox first met them , it was so cool and pleasant that the two brothers said , " let us sit down by the side of the river , and rest a while , to eat and drink . "
so he said , " yes , " and forgot the fox"s counsel , and sat down on the side of the river ; and while he suspected nothing , they came behind , and threw him down the bank , and took the princess , the horse , and the bird , and went home to the king their master , and said .
" all this have we won by our labour . "
then there was great rejoicing made ; but the horse would not eat , the bird would not sing , and the princess wept .
the youngest son fell to the bottom of the river"s bed : luckily it was nearly dry , but his bones were almost broken , and the bank was so steep that he could find no way to get out .
then the old fox came once more , and scolded him for not following his advice ; otherwise no evil would have befallen him : " yet , " said he , " i cannot leave you here , so lay hold of my tail and hold fast . "
then he pulled him out of the river , and said to him , as he got upon the bank , " your brothers have set watch to kill you , if they find you in the kingdom " so he dressed himself as a poor man , and came secretly to the king"s court , and was scarcely within the doors when the horse began to eat , and the bird to sing , and the princess left off weeping .
then he went to the king , and told him all his brothers " roguery ; and they were seized and punished , and he had the princess given to him again ; and after the king"s death he was heir to his kingdom a long while after , he went to walk one day in the wood , and the old fox met him , and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him , and cut off his head and feet .
and at last he did so , and in a moment the fox was changed into a man , and turned out to be the brother of the princess , who had been lost a great many many years .
some men are born to good luck : all they do or try to do comes right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will , they will always , like poor puss , alight upon their legs , and only move on so much the faster .
the world may very likely not always think of them as they think of themselves , but what care they for the world ? what can it know about the matter ?
one of these lucky beings was neighbour hans .
seven long years he had worked hard for his master .
at last he said , " master , my time is up ; i must go home and see my poor mother once more : so pray pay me my wages and let me go . "
and the master said , " you have been a faithful and good servant , hans , so your pay shall be handsome . "
then he gave him a lump of silver as big as his head .
hans took out his pocket-handkerchief , put the piece of silver into it , threw it over his shoulder , and jogged off on his road homewards .
as he went lazily on , dragging one foot after another , a man came in sight , trotting gaily along on a capital horse .
" ah ! " said hans aloud , " what a fine thing it is to ride on horseback !
there he sits as easy and happy as if he was at home , in the chair by his fireside ; he trips against no stones , saves shoe-leather , and gets on he hardly knows how . "
hans did not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all , and said , " well , friend , why do you go on foot then ? "
" ah ! " said he , " i have this load to carry : to be sure it is silver , but it is so heavy that i can"t hold up my head , and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly . "
" what do you say of making an exchange ? " said the horseman .
" i will give you my horse , and you shall give me the silver ; which will save you a great deal of trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you . "
" with all my heart , " said hans : " but as you are so kind to me , i must tell you one thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you . "
however , the horseman got off , took the silver , helped hans up , gave him the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other , and said , " when you want to go very fast , smack your lips loudly together , and cry " jip ! " " hans was delighted as he sat on the horse , drew himself up , squared his elbows , turned out his toes , cracked his whip , and rode merrily off , one minute whistling a merry tune , and another singing , " no care and no sorrow , a fig for the morrow !
we"ll laugh and be merry , sing neigh down derry ! "
after a time he thought he should like to go a little faster , so he smacked his lips and cried " jip ! "
away went the horse full gallop ; and before hans knew what he was about , he was thrown off , and lay on his back by the road-side .
his horse would have ran off , if a shepherd who was coming by , driving a cow , had not stopped it .
hans soon came to himself , and got upon his legs again , sadly vexed , and said to the shepherd , " this riding is no joke , when a man has the luck to get upon a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break his neck .
however , i"m off now once for all : i like your cow now a great deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick , and has spoiled my best coat , you see , in this puddle ; which , by the by , smells not very like a nosegay .
one can walk along at one"s leisure behind that cow--keep good company , and have milk , butter , and cheese , every day , into the bargain .
what would i give to have such a prize ! "
" well , " said the shepherd , " if you are so fond of her , i will change my cow for your horse ; i like to do good to my neighbours , even though i lose by it myself . "
" done ! " said hans , merrily .
" what a noble heart that good man has ! " thought he .
then the shepherd jumped upon the horse , wished hans and the cow good morning , and away he rode .
hans brushed his coat , wiped his face and hands , rested a while , and then drove off his cow quietly , and thought his bargain a very lucky one .
" if i have only a piece of bread ( and i certainly shall always be able to get that ) , i can , whenever i like , eat my butter and cheese with it ; and when i am thirsty i can milk my cow and drink the milk : and what can i wish for more ? "
when he came to an inn , he halted , ate up all his bread , and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer .
when he had rested himself he set off again , driving his cow towards his mother"s village .
but the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on , till at last , as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than an hour to cross , he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth .
" i can find a cure for this , " thought he ; " now i will milk my cow and quench my thirst " : so he tied her to the stump of a tree , and held his leathern cap to milk into ; but not a drop was to be had .
who would have thought that this cow , which was to bring him milk and butter and cheese , was all that time utterly dry ?
hans had not thought of looking to that .
while he was trying his luck in milking , and managing the matter very clumsily , the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome ; and at last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down ; and there he lay a long while senseless .
luckily a butcher soon came by , driving a pig in a wheelbarrow .
" what is the matter with you , my man ? " said the butcher , as he helped him up .
hans told him what had happened , how he was dry , and wanted to milk his cow , but found the cow was dry too .
then the butcher gave him a flask of ale , saying , " there , drink and refresh yourself ; your cow will give you no milk : don"t you see she is an old beast , good for nothing but the slaughter-house ? "
" alas , alas ! " said hans , " who would have thought it ?
what a shame to take my horse , and give me only a dry cow !
if i kill her , what will she be good for ?
i hate cow-beef ; it is not tender enough for me .
if it were a pig now--like that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do something with it ; it would at any rate make sausages . "
" well , " said the butcher , " i don"t like to say no , when one is asked to do a kind , neighbourly thing .
to please you i will change , and give you my fine fat pig for the cow . "
" heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial ! " said hans , as he gave the butcher the cow ; and taking the pig off the wheel-barrow , drove it away , holding it by the string that was tied to its leg .
so on he jogged , and all seemed now to go right with him : he had met with some misfortunes , to be sure ; but he was now well repaid for all .
how could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at last got ?
the next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose .
the countryman stopped to ask what was o"clock ; this led to further chat ; and hans told him all his luck , how he had so many good bargains , and how all the world went gay and smiling with him the countryman then began to tell his tale , and said he was going to take the goose to a christening .
" feel , " said he , " how heavy it is , and yet it is only eight weeks old .
whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it , it has lived so well ! "
" you"re right , " said hans , as he weighed it in his hand ; " but if you talk of fat , my pig is no trifle . "
meantime the countryman began to look grave , and shook his head .
" hark ye ! " said he , " my worthy friend , you seem a good sort of fellow , so i can"t help doing you a kind turn .
your pig may get you into a scrape .
in the village i just came from , the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty .
i was dreadfully afraid when i saw you that you had got the squire"s pig .
if you have , and they catch you , it will be a bad job for you .
the least they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond .
can you swim ? "
poor hans was sadly frightened .
" good man , " cried he , " pray get me out of this scrape .
i know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born ; but he may have been the squire"s for aught i can tell : you know this country better than i do , take my pig and give me the goose . "
" i ought to have something into the bargain , " said the countryman ; " give a fat goose for a pig , indeed !
" tis not everyone would do so much for you as that .
however , i will not be hard upon you , as you are in trouble . "
then he took the string in his hand , and drove off the pig by a side path ; while hans went on the way homewards free from care .
" after all , " thought he , " that chap is pretty well taken in .
i don"t care whose pig it is , but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me .
i have much the best of the bargain .
first there will be a capital roast ; then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months ; and then there are all the beautiful white feathers .
i will put them into my pillow , and then i am sure i shall sleep soundly without rocking .
how happy my mother will be !
talk of a pig , indeed !
give me a fine fat goose . "
as he came to the next village , he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel , working and singing , " o"er hill and o"er dale so happy i roam , work light and live well , all the world is my home ; then who so blythe , so merry as i ? "
hans stood looking on for a while , and at last said , " you must be well off , master grinder ! you seem so happy at your work . "
" yes , " said the other , " mine is a golden trade ; a good grinder never puts his hand into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that beautiful goose ? "
" i did not buy it , i gave a pig for it . "
" and where did you get the pig ? "
" i gave a cow for it . "
" and the cow ? "
" i gave a horse for it . "
" and the horse ? "
" i gave a lump of silver as big as my head for it . "
" and the silver ? "
" oh !
i worked hard for that seven long years . "
" you have thriven well in the world hitherto , " said the grinder , " now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand in it , your fortune would be made . "
" very true : but how is that to be managed ? "
" how ?
why , you must turn grinder like myself , " said the other ; " you only want a grindstone ; the rest will come of itself .
here is one that is but little the worse for wear : i would not ask more than the value of your goose for it--will you buy ? "
" how can you ask ? " said hans ; " i should be the happiest man in the world , if i could have money whenever i put my hand in my pocket : what could i want more ? there"s the goose . "
" now , " said the grinder , as he gave him a common rough stone that lay by his side , " this is a most capital stone ; do but work it well enough , and you can make an old nail cut with it . "
hans took the stone , and went his way with a light heart : his eyes sparkled for joy , and he said to himself , " surely i must have been born in a lucky hour ; everything i could want or wish for comes of itself .
people are so kind ; they seem really to think i do them a favour in letting them make me rich , and giving me good bargains . "
meantime he began to be tired , and hungry too , for he had given away his last penny in his joy at getting the cow .
at last he could go no farther , for the stone tired him sadly : and he dragged himself to the side of a river , that he might take a drink of water , and rest a while .
so he laid the stone carefully by his side on the bank : but , as he stooped down to drink , he forgot it , pushed it a little , and down it rolled , plump into the stream for a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water ; then sprang up and danced for joy , and again fell upon his knees and thanked heaven , with tears in his eyes , for its kindness in taking away his only plague , the ugly heavy stone .
" how happy am i ! " cried he ; " nobody was ever so lucky as i . "
then up he got with a light heart , free from all his troubles , and walked on till he reached his mother"s house , and told her how very easy the road to good luck was .
there was once an old castle , that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy wood , and in the castle lived an old fairy .
now this fairy could take any shape she pleased .
all the day long she flew about in the form of an owl , or crept about the country like a cat ; but at night she always became an old woman again .
when any young man came within a hundred paces of her castle , he became quite fixed , and could not move a step till she came and set him free ; which she would not do till he had given her his word never to come there again : but when any pretty maiden came within that space she was changed into a bird , and the fairy put her into a cage , and hung her up in a chamber in the castle .
there were seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle , and all with beautiful birds in them now there was once a maiden whose name was jorinda .
she was prettier than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before , and a shepherd lad , whose name was jorindel , was very fond of her , and they were soon to be married .
one day they went to walk in the wood , that they might be alone ; and jorindel said , " we must take care that we don"t go too near to the fairy"s castle . "
it was a beautiful evening ; the last rays of the setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon the green underwood beneath , and the turtle-doves sang from the tall birches .
jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun ; jorindel sat by her side ; and both felt sad , they knew not why ; but it seemed as if they were to be parted from one another for ever .
they had wandered a long way ; and when they looked to see which way they should go home , they found themselves at a loss to know what path to take .
the sun was setting fast , and already half of its circle had sunk behind the hill : jorindel on a sudden looked behind him , and saw through the bushes that they had , without knowing it , sat down close under the old walls of the castle .
then he shrank for fear , turned pale , and trembled .
jorinda was just singing , " the ring-dove sang from the willow spray , well-a-day !
well-a-day !
he mourn"d for the fate of his darling mate , well-a-day ! " when her song stopped suddenly .
jorindel turned to see the reason , and beheld his jorinda changed into a nightingale , so that her song ended with a mournful _ jug , jug _ .
an owl with fiery eyes flew three times round them , and three times screamed : " tu whu !
tu whu !
tu whu ! "
jorindel could not move ; he stood fixed as a stone , and could neither weep , nor speak , nor stir hand or foot .
and now the sun went quite down ; the gloomy night came ; the owl flew into a bush ; and a moment after the old fairy came forth pale and meagre , with staring eyes , and a nose and chin that almost met one another .
she mumbled something to herself , seized the nightingale , and went away with it in her hand .
poor jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but what could he do ?
he could not speak , he could not move from the spot where he stood .
at last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse voice : " till the prisoner is fast , and her doom is cast , there stay !
oh , stay !
when the charm is around her , and the spell has bound her , hie away ! away ! "
on a sudden jorindel found himself free .
then he fell on his knees before the fairy , and prayed her to give him back his dear jorinda : but she laughed at him , and said he should never see her again ; then she went her way .
he prayed , he wept , he sorrowed , but all in vain .
" alas ! " he said , " what will become of me ? "
he could not go back to his own home , so he went to a strange village , and employed himself in keeping sheep .
many a time did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go , but all in vain ; he heard or saw nothing of jorinda .
at last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower , and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl ; and he dreamt that he plucked the flower , and went with it in his hand into the castle , and that everything he touched with it was disenchanted , and that there he found his jorinda again .
in the morning when he awoke , he began to search over hill and dale for this pretty flower ; and eight long days he sought for it in vain : but on the ninth day , early in the morning , he found the beautiful purple flower ; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop , as big as a costly pearl .
then he plucked the flower , and set out and travelled day and night , till he came again to the castle .
he walked nearer than a hundred paces to it , and yet he did not become fixed as before , but found that he could go quite close up to the door .
jorindel was very glad indeed to see this .
then he touched the door with the flower , and it sprang open ; so that he went in through the court , and listened when he heard so many birds singing .
at last he came to the chamber where the fairy sat , with the seven hundred birds singing in the seven hundred cages .
when she saw jorindel she was very angry , and screamed with rage ; but she could not come within two yards of him , for the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard .
he looked around at the birds , but alas ! there were many , many nightingales , and how then should he find out which was his jorinda ?
while he was thinking what to do , he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages , and was making the best of her way off through the door .
he ran or flew after her , touched the cage with the flower , and jorinda stood before him , and threw her arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever , as beautiful as when they walked together in the wood .
then he touched all the other birds with the flower , so that they all took their old forms again ; and he took jorinda home , where they were married , and lived happily together many years : and so did a good many other lads , whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy"s cages by themselves , much longer than they liked .
an honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him a great many years , but was now growing old and every day more and more unfit for work .
his master therefore was tired of keeping him and began to think of putting an end to him ; but the ass , who saw that some mischief was in the wind , took himself slyly off , and began his journey towards the great city , " for there , " thought he , " i may turn musician . "
after he had travelled a little way , he spied a dog lying by the roadside and panting as if he were tired .
" what makes you pant so , my friend ? " said the ass .
" alas ! " said the dog , " my master was going to knock me on the head , because i am old and weak , and can no longer make myself useful to him in hunting ; so i ran away ; but what can i do to earn my livelihood ? "
" hark ye ! " said the ass , " i am going to the great city to turn musician : suppose you go with me , and try what you can do in the same way ? "
the dog said he was willing , and they jogged on together .
they had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the road and making a most rueful face .
" pray , my good lady , " said the ass , " what"s the matter with you ?
you look quite out of spirits ! "
" ah , me ! " said the cat , " how can one be in good spirits when one"s life is in danger ?
because i am beginning to grow old , and had rather lie at my ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice , my mistress laid hold of me , and was going to drown me ; and though i have been lucky enough to get away from her , i do not know what i am to live upon . "
" oh , " said the ass , " by all means go with us to the great city ; you are a good night singer , and may make your fortune as a musician . "
the cat was pleased with the thought , and joined the party .
soon afterwards , as they were passing by a farmyard , they saw a cock perched upon a gate , and screaming out with all his might and main .
" bravo ! " said the ass ; " upon my word , you make a famous noise ; pray what is all this about ? "
" why , " said the cock , " i was just now saying that we should have fine weather for our washing-day , and yet my mistress and the cook don"t thank me for my pains , but threaten to cut off my head tomorrow , and make broth of me for the guests that are coming on sunday ! "
" heaven forbid ! " said the ass , " come with us master chanticleer ; it will be better , at any rate , than staying here to have your head cut off !
besides , who knows ?
if we care to sing in tune , we may get up some kind of a concert ; so come along with us . "
" with all my heart , " said the cock : so they all four went on jollily together .
they could not , however , reach the great city the first day ; so when night came on , they went into a wood to sleep .
the ass and the dog laid themselves down under a great tree , and the cat climbed up into the branches ; while the cock , thinking that the higher he sat the safer he should be , flew up to the very top of the tree , and then , according to his custom , before he went to sleep , looked out on all sides of him to see that everything was well .
in doing this , he saw afar off something bright and shining and calling to his companions said , " there must be a house no great way off , for i see a light . "
" if that be the case , " said the ass , " we had better change our quarters , for our lodging is not the best in the world ! "
" besides , " added the dog , " i should not be the worse for a bone or two , or a bit of meat . "
so they walked off together towards the spot where chanticleer had seen the light , and as they drew near it became larger and brighter , till they at last came close to a house in which a gang of robbers lived .
the ass , being the tallest of the company , marched up to the window and peeped in .
" well , donkey , " said chanticleer , " what do you see ? "
" what do i see ? " replied the ass .
" why , i see a table spread with all kinds of good things , and robbers sitting round it making merry . "
" that would be a noble lodging for us , " said the cock .
" yes , " said the ass , " if we could only get in " ; so they consulted together how they should contrive to get the robbers out ; and at last they hit upon a plan .
the ass placed himself upright on his hind legs , with his forefeet resting against the window ; the dog got upon his back ; the cat scrambled up to the dog"s shoulders , and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat"s head .
when all was ready a signal was given , and they began their music .
the ass brayed , the dog barked , the cat mewed , and the cock screamed ; and then they all broke through the window at once , and came tumbling into the room , amongst the broken glass , with a most hideous clatter !
the robbers , who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert , had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them , and scampered away as fast as they could .
the coast once clear , our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what the robbers had left , with as much eagerness as if they had not expected to eat again for a month .
as soon as they had satisfied themselves , they put out the lights , and each once more sought out a resting-place to his own liking .
the donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in the yard , the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door , the cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes , and the cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house ; and , as they were all rather tired with their journey , they soon fell asleep .
but about midnight , when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were out and that all seemed quiet , they began to think that they had been in too great a hurry to run away ; and one of them , who was bolder than the rest , went to see what was going on .
finding everything still , he marched into the kitchen , and groped about till he found a match in order to light a candle ; and then , espying the glittering fiery eyes of the cat , he mistook them for live coals , and held the match to them to light it .
but the cat , not understanding this joke , sprang at his face , and spat , and scratched at him this frightened him dreadfully , and away he ran to the back door ; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the leg ; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him ; and the cock , who had been awakened by the noise , crowed with all his might .
at this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades , and told the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house , and had spat at him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers ; how a man with a knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door , and stabbed him in the leg ; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a club , and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out , " throw the rascal up here ! "
after this the robbers never dared to go back to the house ; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters that they took up their abode there ; and there they are , i dare say , at this very day .
a shepherd had a faithful dog , called sultan , who was grown very old , and had lost all his teeth .
and one day when the shepherd and his wife were standing together before the house the shepherd said , " i will shoot old sultan tomorrow morning , for he is of no use now . "
but his wife said , " pray let the poor faithful creature live ; he has served us well a great many years , and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of his days . "
" but what can we do with him ? " said the shepherd , " he has not a tooth in his head , and the thieves don"t care for him at all ; to be sure he has served us , but then he did it to earn his livelihood ; tomorrow shall be his last day , depend upon it . "
poor sultan , who was lying close by them , heard all that the shepherd and his wife said to one another , and was very much frightened to think tomorrow would be his last day ; so in the evening he went to his good friend the wolf , who lived in the wood , and told him all his sorrows , and how his master meant to kill him in the morning .
" make yourself easy , " said the wolf , " i will give you some good advice .
your master , you know , goes out every morning very early with his wife into the field ; and they take their little child with them , and lay it down behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work .
now do you lie down close by the child , and pretend to be watching it , and i will come out of the wood and run away with it ; you must run after me as fast as you can , and i will let it drop ; then you may carry it back , and they will think you have saved their child , and will be so thankful to you that they will take care of you as long as you live . "
the dog liked this plan very well ; and accordingly so it was managed .
the wolf ran with the child a little way ; the shepherd and his wife screamed out ; but sultan soon overtook him , and carried the poor little thing back to his master and mistress .
then the shepherd patted him on the head , and said , " old sultan has saved our child from the wolf , and therefore he shall live and be well taken care of , and have plenty to eat .
wife , go home , and give him a good dinner , and let him have my old cushion to sleep on as long as he lives . "
so from this time forward sultan had all that he could wish for .
soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy , and said , " now , my good fellow , you must tell no tales , but turn your head the other way when i want to taste one of the old shepherd"s fine fat sheep . "
" no , " said the sultan ; " i will be true to my master . "
however , the wolf thought he was in joke , and came one night to get a dainty morsel .
but sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do ; so he laid wait for him behind the barn door , and when the wolf was busy looking out for a good fat sheep , he had a stout cudgel laid about his back , that combed his locks for him finely .
then the wolf was very angry , and called sultan " an old rogue , " and swore he would have his revenge .
so the next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter .
now sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd"s old three-legged cat ; so he took her with him , and as the poor thing limped along with some trouble , she stuck up her tail straight in the air .
the wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground ; and when they espied their enemies coming , and saw the cat"s long tail standing straight in the air , they thought she was carrying a sword for sultan to fight with ; and every time she limped , they thought she was picking up a stone to throw at them ; so they said they should not like this way of fighting , and the boar lay down behind a bush , and the wolf jumped up into a tree .
sultan and the cat soon came up , and looked about and wondered that no one was there .
the boar , however , had not quite hidden himself , for his ears stuck out of the bush ; and when he shook one of them a little , the cat , seeing something move , and thinking it was a mouse , sprang upon it , and bit and scratched it , so that the boar jumped up and grunted , and ran away , roaring out , " look up in the tree , there sits the one who is to blame . "
so they looked up , and espied the wolf sitting amongst the branches ; and they called him a cowardly rascal , and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of himself , and had promised to be good friends again with old sultan .
in a village dwelt a poor old woman , who had gathered together a dish of beans and wanted to cook them so she made a fire on her hearth , and that it might burn the quicker , she lighted it with a handful of straw .
when she was emptying the beans into the pan , one dropped without her observing it , and lay on the ground beside a straw , and soon afterwards a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two .
then the straw began and said : " dear friends , from whence do you come here ? "
the coal replied : " i fortunately sprang out of the fire , and if i had not escaped by sheer force , my death would have been certain,--i should have been burnt to ashes . "
the bean said : " i too have escaped with a whole skin , but if the old woman had got me into the pan , i should have been made into broth without any mercy , like my comrades . "
